# 📔 Day 2 - Data Types

- [Data Types](#data-types)
	- [Primitive Data Types](#primitive-data-types)
	- [Non-Primitive Data Types](#non-primitive-data-types)
- [Numbers](#numbers)
	- [Declaring Number Data Types](#declaring-number-data-types)
	- [Math Object](#math-object)
		- [Random Number Generator](#random-number-generator)
- [Strings](#strings)
	- [String Concatenation](#string-concatenation)
		- [Concatenating Using Addition Operator](#concatenating-using-addition-operator)
		- [Long Literal Strings](#long-literal-strings)
		- [Escape Sequences in Strings](#escape-sequences-in-strings)
		- [Template Literals (Template Strings)](#template-literals-template-strings)
	- [String Methods](#string-methods)
- [Checking Data Types and Casting](#checking-data-types-and-casting)
	- [Checking Data Types](#checking-data-types)
	- [Changing Data Type (Casting)](#changing-data-type-casting)
		- [String to Int](#string-to-int)
		- [String to Float](#string-to-float)
		- [Float to Int](#float-to-int)
- [💻 Day 2: Exercises](#-day-2-exercises)
	- [Exercise: Level 1](#exercise-level-1)
	- [Exercise: Level 2](#exercise-level-2)
	- [Exercises: Level 3](#exercises-level-3)

## Data Types

Data types can be divided into two:

1. Primitive data types
2. Non-primitive data types (Object References)

### Primitive Data Types

Primitive data types in JavaScript include:

 1. Numbers - Integers, floats
 2. Strings - Any data under single quote, double quote or backtick quote
 3. Booleans - true or false value
 4. Null - empty value or no value
 5. Undefined - a declared variable without a value
 6. Symbol - A unique value that can be generated by Symbol constructor

*Primitive* data types are immutable (non-modifiable) data types.
Primitive data types are compared by its values.

### Non-Primitive Data Types

Non-primitive data types in JavaScript includes:

1. Objects - 
2. Arrays - An array is a list of data values in a square bracket. Arrays can contain the same or different data types. Array values are referenced by their index. In JavaScript array index starts at zero.

*Non-primitive* data types are modifiable or mutable.
Non-primitive data types cannot be compared by value. Even if two non-primitive data types have the same properties and values, they are not strictly equal.

Do not compare arrays, functions, or objects. Non-primitive values are referred to as reference types, because they are being compared by reference instead of value. Two objects are only strictly equal if they refer to the same underlying object.

## Numbers

Numbers are integers and decimal values which can do all the arithmetic operations. 

### Declaring Number Data Types

```js
let age = 35
const gravity = 9.81  // we use const for non-changing values
```

### Math Object

Math Object provides a lots of methods to work with numbers.

```js
const PI = Math.PI
console.log(PI) // 3.141592653589793

// Rounding to the closest number
// if above .5 up if less 0.5 down rounding

console.log(Math.round(PI)) // 3 to round values to the nearest number
console.log(Math.round(9.81)) // 10

console.log(Math.floor(PI)) // 3 rounding down

console.log(Math.ceil(PI)) // 4 rounding up

console.log(Math.min(-5, 3, 20, 4, 5, 10)) // -5, returns the minimum value

console.log(Math.max(-5, 3, 20, 4, 5, 10)) // 20, returns the maximum value

const randNum = Math.random() // creates random number between 0 to 0.999999
console.log(randNum)

// Let us  create random number between 0 to 10

const num = Math.floor(Math.random () * 11) // creates random number between 0 and 10
console.log(num)

//Absolute value
console.log(Math.abs(-10)) // 10

//Square root
console.log(Math.sqrt(100)) // 10

console.log(Math.sqrt(2)) // 1.4142135623730951

// Power
console.log(Math.pow(3, 2)) // 9

console.log(Math.E) // 2.718

// Logarithm
// Returns the natural logarithm with base E of x, Math.log(x)
console.log(Math.log(2)) // 0.6931471805599453
console.log(Math.log(10)) // 2.302585092994046

// Returns the natural logarithm of 2 and 10 respectively
console.log(Math.LN2) // 0.6931471805599453
console.log(Math.LN10) // 2.302585092994046

// Trigonometry
Math.sin(0)
Math.sin(60)

Math.cos(0)
Math.cos(60)
```

#### Random Number Generator

The JavaScript Math Object has a random() method number generator which generates number from 0 to 0.999999999...

```js
let randomNum = Math.random() // generates 0 to 0.999
let numBtnZeroAndTen = randomNum * 11

console.log(numBtnZeroAndTen) // this gives: min 0 and max 10.99

let randomNumRoundToFloor = Math.floor(numBtnZeroAndTen)
console.log(randomNumRoundToFloor) // this gives between 0 and 10
```

## Strings

Strings are texts, which are under **single** , **double**, **back-tick** quote. To declare a string, we need a variable name, assignment operator, a value under a single quote, double quote, or backtick quote.

### String Concatenation

Connecting two or more strings together is called concatenation.
We can concatenate strings in different ways.

#### Concatenating Using Addition Operator

Concatenating using the addition operator is an old way. This way of concatenating is tedious and error-prone. It is good to know how to concatenate this way, but I strongly suggest to use the ES6 template strings.

```js
let fullName =firstName + space + lastName
let personInfoOne = fullName + '. I am ' + age + '. I live in ' + country; // ES5 string addition
```

#### Long Literal Strings

A string could be a single character or paragraph or a page. If the string length is too big it does not fit in one line. We can use the backslash character (\) at the end of each line to indicate that the string will continue on the next line.

#### Escape Sequences in Strings

In JavaScript and other programming languages \ followed by some characters is an escape sequence. Let's see the most common escape characters:

- \n: new line
- \t: Tab, means 8 spaces
- \\: Back slash symbol
- \': Single quote (')
- \": Double quote (")

#### Template Literals (Template Strings)

To create a template strings, we use two back-ticks. We can inject data as expressions inside a template string. To inject data, we enclose the expression with a curly bracket({}) preceded by a $ sign.

```js
//Syntax
`String literal text`
`String literal text ${expression}`
```

Using a string template or string interpolation method, we can add expressions, which could be a value, or some operations (comparison, arithmetic operations, ternary operation).

```js
let a = 2
let b = 3
console.log(`${a} is greater than ${b}: ${a > b}`)
```

### String Methods

Everything in JavaScript is an object. A string is a primitive data type that means we can not modify it once it is created. The string object has many string methods. There are different string methods that can help us to work with strings.

1. *length*: The string length method returns the number of characters in a string included empty space.
2. *Accessing characters in a string*: We can access each character in a string using its index. In programming, counting starts from 0. The first index of the string is zero, and the last index is the length of the string minus one. `variableName[indexNumber]`
3. *toUpperCase()*: this method changes the string to uppercase letters.
4. *toLowerCase()*: this method changes the string to lowercase letters.
5. *substr()*: It takes two arguments, the starting index and number of characters to slice.
6. *substring()*: It takes two arguments, the starting index and the stopping index but it doesn't include the character at the stopping index.
7. *split()*: The split method splits a string at a specified place. `string.split()` `string.split(' ')` 
8. *trim()*: Removes trailing space in the beginning or the end of a string. `string.trim()` `string.trim(' ')` `string.split('')` `string.split(',')` `string.split(', ')`
9. *includes()*: It takes a substring argument and it checks if substring argument exists in the string. includes() returns a boolean. If a substring exist in a string, it returns true, otherwise it returns false. It is case sensitive! `string.includes('content')`
10. *replace()*: takes as a parameter the old substring and a new substring. `string.replace(oldsubstring, newsubstring)`
11. *charAt()*: Takes index and it returns the value at that index `string.charAt(index)`
12. *charCodeAt()*: Takes index and it returns char code (ASCII number) of the value at that index `string.charCodeAt(index)`
13. *indexOf()*: Takes a substring and if the substring exists in a string it returns the first position of the substring if does not exist it returns -1 `string.indexOf(substring)`
14. *lastIndexOf()*: Takes a substring and if the substring exists in a string it returns the last position of the substring if it does not exist it returns -1 `string.lastIndexOf(substring)`
15. *concat()*: it takes many substrings and joins them. `string.concat(substring, substring, substring)`
16. *startsWith*: it takes a substring as an argument and it checks if the string starts with that specified substring. It returns a boolean(true or false). `string.startsWith(substring)`
17. *endsWith*: it takes a substring as an argument and it checks if the string ends with that specified substring. It returns a boolean(true or false). `string.endsWith(substring)`
18. *search*: it takes a substring as an argument and it returns the index of the first match. The search value can be a string or a regular expression pattern. `string.search(substring)`
19. *match*: it takes a substring or regular expression pattern as an argument and it returns an array if there is match if not it returns null. Let us see how a regular expression pattern looks like. It starts with / sign and ends with / sign. `let patternTwo = /love/gi   // g-means to search in the whole text, i - case insensitive` `string.match(substring`
20. *repeat()*: it takes a number as argument and it returns the repeated version of the string. `string.repeat(n)`

## Checking Data Types and Casting

### Checking Data Types

To check the data type of a certain variable we use the typeof method.

`console.log(typeof variabeOrElement) `

### Changing Data Type (Casting)

- *Casting*: Converting one data type to another data type. We use parseInt(), parseFloat(), Number(), + sign, str() When we do arithmetic operations string numbers should be first converted to integer or float if not it returns an error.


#### String to Int

We can convert string number to a number. Any number inside a quote is a string number. 

We can convert string to number using the following methods:
- parseInt() ` parseInt(num)`
- Number() `Number(num)`
- Plus sign(+) `+num`

#### String to Float

We can convert string float number to a float number. Any float number inside a quote is a string float number. 

We can convert string float to number using the following methods:
- parseFloat() `parseFloat(num)`
- Number() `Number(num)`
- Plus sign(+) `+num`

#### Float to Int

We can convert float numbers to integers. We use the following method to convert float to int:

- parseInt()

## 💻 Day 2: Exercises

### Exercise: Level 1

1. Declare a variable named challenge and assign it to an initial value **'30 Days Of JavaScript'**.
2. Print the string on the browser console using __console.log()__
3. Print the __length__ of the string on the browser console using _console.log()_
4. Change all the string characters to capital letters using __toUpperCase()__ method
5. Change all the string characters to lowercase letters using __toLowerCase()__ method
6. Cut (slice) out the first word of the string using __substr()__ or __substring()__ method
7. Slice out the phrase *Days Of JavaScript* from *30 Days Of JavaScript*.
8. Check if the string contains a word __Script__ using __includes()__ method
9. Split the __string__ into an __array__ using __split()__ method
10. Split the string 30 Days Of JavaScript at the space using __split()__ method
11. 'Facebook, Google, Microsoft, Apple, IBM, Oracle, Amazon' __split__ the string at the comma and change it to an array.
12. Change 30 Days Of JavaScript to 30 Days Of Python using __replace()__ method.
13. What is character at index 15 in '30 Days Of JavaScript' string? Use __charAt()__ method.
14. What is the character code of J in '30 Days Of JavaScript' string using __charCodeAt()__
15. Use __indexOf__ to determine the position of the first occurrence of __a__ in 30 Days Of JavaScript
16. Use __lastIndexOf__ to determine the position of the last occurrence of __a__ in 30 Days Of JavaScript.
17. Use __indexOf__ to find the position of the first occurrence of the word __because__ in the following sentence:__'You cannot end a sentence with because because because is a conjunction'__
18. Use __lastIndexOf__ to find the position of the last occurrence of the word __because__ in the following sentence:__'You cannot end a sentence with because because because is a conjunction'__
19. Use __search__ to find the position of the first occurrence of the word __because__ in the following sentence:__'You cannot end a sentence with because because because is a conjunction'__
20. Use __trim()__ to remove any trailing whitespace at the beginning and the end of a string.E.g ' 30 Days Of JavaScript '.
21. Use __startsWith()__ method with the string *30 Days Of JavaScript* and make the result true
22. Use __endsWith()__ method with the string *30 Days Of JavaScript* and make the result true
23. Use __match()__ method to find all the __a__’s in 30 Days Of JavaScript
24. Use __concat()__ and merge '30 Days of' and 'JavaScript' to a single string, '30 Days Of JavaScript'
25. Use __repeat()__ method to print 30 Days Of JavaScript 2 times

### Exercise: Level 2

1. Using console.log() print out the following statement:

    ```sh
    The quote 'There is no exercise better for the heart than reaching down and lifting people up.' by John Holmes teaches us to help one another.
    ```

2. Using console.log() print out the following quote by Mother Teresa:

    ```sh
    "Love is not patronizing and charity isn't about pity, it is about love. Charity and love are the same -- with charity you give love, so don't just give money but reach out your hand instead."
    ```

3. Check if typeof '10' is exactly equal to 10. If not make it exactly equal.
4. Check if parseFloat('9.8') is equal to 10 if not make it exactly equal with 10.
5. Check if 'on' is found in both python and jargon
6. _I hope this course is not full of jargon_. Check if _jargon_ is in the sentence.
7. Generate a random number between 0 and 100 inclusively.
8. Generate a random number between 50 and 100 inclusively.
9. Generate a random number between 0 and 255 inclusively.
10. Access the 'JavaScript' string characters using a random number.
11. Use console.log() and escape characters to print the following pattern.

    ```js
    1 1 1 1 1
    2 1 2 4 8
    3 1 3 9 27
    4 1 4 16 64
    5 1 5 25 125
    ```

12.  Use __substr__ to slice out the phrase __because because because__ from the following sentence:__'You cannot end a sentence with because because because is a conjunction'__

### Exercises: Level 3

1. 'Love is the best thing in this world. Some found their love and some are still looking for their love.' Count the number of word __love__ in this sentence.
2. Use __match()__ to count the number of all __because__ in the following sentence:__'You cannot end a sentence with because because because is a conjunction'__
3. Clean the following text and find the most frequent word (hint, use replace and regular expressions).

    ```js
        const sentence = '%I $am@% a %tea@cher%, &and& I lo%#ve %te@a@ching%;. The@re $is no@th@ing; &as& mo@re rewarding as educa@ting &and& @emp%o@weri@ng peo@ple. ;I found tea@ching m%o@re interesting tha@n any ot#her %jo@bs. %Do@es thi%s mo@tiv#ate yo@u to be a tea@cher!? %Th#is 30#Days&OfJavaScript &is al@so $the $resu@lt of &love& of tea&ching'
    ```

4. Calculate the total annual income of the person by extracting the numbers from the following text. 'He earns 5000 euro from salary per month, 10000 euro annual bonus, 15000 euro online courses per month.'